What's Data Science?

Data science is the study of data to extract meaningful insights for business. It is a multidisciplinary approach that combines principles and practices from the fields of mathematics, statistics, artificial intelligence, and computer engineering to analyze large amounts of data. 
This analysis helps data scientists to ask and answer questions like what happened, why it happened, what will happen, and what can be done with the results.

What is data science used for?

Data science is used to study data in four main ways:

1. Descriptive analysis

Descriptive analysis examines data to gain insights into what happened or what is happening in the data environment. It is characterized by data visualizations such as pie charts, bar charts, line graphs, tables, or generated narratives. For example, a flight booking service may record data like the number of tickets booked each day. Descriptive analysis will reveal booking spikes, booking slumps, and high-performing months for this service.

2. Diagnostic analysis

Diagnostic analysis is a deep-dive or detailed data examination to understand why something happened. It is characterized by techniques such as drill-down, data discovery, data mining, and correlations. Multiple data operations and transformations may be performed on a given data set to discover unique patterns in each of these techniques.For example, the flight service might drill down on a particularly high-performing month to better understand the booking spike. This may lead to the discovery that many customers visit a particular city to attend a monthly sporting event.

3. Predictive analysis

Predictive analysis uses historical data to make accurate forecasts about data patterns that may occur in the future. It is characterized by techniques such as machine learning, forecasting, pattern matching, and predictive modeling. In each of these techniques, computers are trained to reverse engineer causality connections in the data.For example, the flight service team might use data science to predict flight booking patterns for the coming year at the start of each year. The computer program or algorithm may look at past data and predict booking spikes for certain destinations in May. Having anticipated their customer’s future travel requirements, the company could start targeted advertising for those cities from February.

4. Prescriptive analysis

Prescriptive analytics takes predictive data to the next level. It not only predicts what is likely to happen but also suggests an optimum response to that outcome. It can analyze the potential implications of different choices and recommend the best course of action. It uses graph analysis, simulation, complex event processing, neural networks, and recommendation engines from machine learning.         

Back to the flight booking example, prescriptive analysis could look at historical marketing campaigns to maximize the advantage of the upcoming booking spike. A data scientist could project booking outcomes for different levels of marketing spend on various marketing channels. These data forecasts would give the flight booking company greater confidence in their marketing decisions.

Data scientist

Is someone who can extract meaning from complex data and assist in decision-making. "Someone who uses data in novel ways to build things.”

What's the difference between supervised and unsupervised learning?

Supervised Learning

Supervised learning involves training a model on labeled data (prediction based on previous data) The desired output or target variable is known during the training process. Examples of supervised learning algorithms:

Linear regression
Logistic regression
Decision trees
Support vector machines (SVM)
Neural networks
Supervised learning is commonly used for tasks such as classification and regression. Classification To predict continuous variables (weight) Classification To predict discretes outcomes (Yes/No)

Unsupervised Learning

Unsupervised learning deals with unlabeled data, where the input data is not accompanied by any target labels or desired outputs. (Ask a bag to group objects: it might group them by shapes, colors or both...) Unsupervised learning algorithms aim to find hidden patterns or clusters in the data, identify anomalies, or reduce the dimensionality of the data. Examples of unsupervised learning algorithms:

Clustering algorithms like k-means, hierarchical clustering, and density-based clustering
Dimensionality reduction techniques like principal component analysis (PCA) and t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE).
